.TH DAZFS 1 "2025-12-30" "dumbass-tree" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
dazfs \- dumbass-friendly ZFS helper
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dazfs
[\-\-dry-run] [\-\-verbose]
.I <command>
.I <subcommand>
[\fIargs\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
dazfs wraps common ZFS operations with safer defaults and a predictable CLI.
It shells out to zpool(8) and zfs(8).
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-dry-run
Print commands instead of executing them.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
More output (repeatable).
.SH COMMANDS
.SS status
Show zpool status and zfs list.
.PP
.B dazfs status
[\-\-pool \fIname\fR]
.SS explain
Quick explanations of common ZFS terms.
.PP
.B dazfs explain
\fIdataset|pool|vdev|mountpoint|canmount|compression|onefs\fR
.SS tree
Create a dataset hierarchy that *looks like one filesystem tree* by mounting datasets under one root.
This is usually what people mean by "merge" in ZFS.
.PP
.B dazfs tree init
\fIpool\fR [\-\-root \fI/path\fR] [\-\-style \fIvault|minimal|nas\fR] [\-\-compression \fIprofile\fR] [\-\-mount-now]
.PP
If the pool already has a different mountpoint, changing it requires \fB\-\-yes\fR.
.SS pool
Pool operations.
.TP
.B dazfs pool create \fIname\fR \fIdevices...\fR [\-\-yes]
Create a pool. Prompts before running unless \fB\-\-yes\fR is provided.
.TP
.B dazfs pool list
Show pools (zpool list).
.TP
.B dazfs pool scrub \fIname\fR
Start a scrub.
.TP
.B dazfs pool add \fIname\fR \fIdevices...\fR \-\-yes
Add a vdev to a pool (irreversible; can change redundancy).
.TP
.B dazfs pool attach \fIname\fR \fIexisting\fR \fInew\fR \-\-yes
Attach a new disk to an existing vdev (often used to turn a single disk into a mirror).
.TP
.B dazfs pool destroy \fIname\fR \-\-yes
Destroy a pool (DANGEROUS).
.SS ds
Dataset operations.
.TP
.B dazfs ds create \fIname\fR
Create a filesystem dataset (zfs create).
.TP
.B dazfs ds list [\fItarget\fR]
List datasets.
.TP
.B dazfs ds mountpoint \fIdataset\fR \fI/path\fR
Set mountpoint property.
.TP
.B dazfs ds compression \fIdataset\fR \-\-profile fast|balanced|max|off
Set compression to a sane value (with fallbacks).
.TP
.B dazfs ds destroy \fIdataset\fR \-\-yes
Destroy dataset (DANGEROUS).
.SS snap
Snapshot operations.
.TP
.B dazfs snap create \fIdataset\fR
Create snapshot (default name is timestamped).
.TP
.B dazfs snap list \fIdataset\fR
List snapshots below dataset.
.TP
.B dazfs snap rollback \fIdataset@snap\fR \-\-yes
Rollback (DANGEROUS).
.SH FILES
See docs in dumbass-tree/docs/.
.SH SEE ALSO
zpool(8), zfs(8)